Let's have a look at determining the inverse
kinematics of our simple two link robot using
a numerical approach.
We're going to load now, into the workspace
a model of our two link robot. And that's
the workspace variable P2, is this new robot
and we can plot the configuration for the
robot for zero joint angles, this function
also defines a workspace variable QZ, which
contains the value of zero zero and that's what the robot looks like in the zero angle configuration.
Now I'm going to define a desired end effector
position for this robot and I'm going to define
simply the translation and it's going to be
one in the X direction, one in the Y direction
and zero in the Z direction.
Remember that this robot has only got two
joints and he can only move in the XY plane
so it doesn’t make sense for me to put a
value for the Z co-ordinate that's anything
but zero. The robot is incapable of achieving
any position where Z is not equal to zero.
And here is the homogeneous transformation,
representing the desired position.
Now in order to determine the inverse kinematics
numerically, I write down our object and I'm
going to use the method ikine, it stands for
Inverse Kinematics. And this particular method
performs a numerical solution to determine
the inverse kinematics. First argument I pass
in is the desired end effector pose T that we've
just defined and I'm going to put in the initial
joint angles that I'm going to use in the search for the optimal joint angles to achieve that pose.
The last argument is a little bit more complex.
It's what I call a "Mask Matrix" and its axis
element matrix and the first two elements
are ones and the last four elements are zeros.
And what this is telling the ikine function
is only try and match the end effector X and
Y position, don't bother trying to match the
Z co-ordinate, don't bother trying to match
the orientation. Because this robot's only
got two degrees of freedom, it can only achieve
two constraints in its end effector pose and
I've chosen those constraints to be its X
position and its Y position. I don't care
about any other elements of the end effector
pose. I hit enter and the solution has come
back a Pi and minus Pi. Well let's plot that,
plot Q and there we see the desired configuration
of the robot to achieve the particular end effector
position that I asked for.
Let's just have a look at that robot from
above and we can see very clearly, the end effector
has moved to the position one in the X direction
and one in the Y direction.
Now let's see if we can find another configuration
of the robot that has got the same end effector
pose. What we're going to do is we're going
to go back to our inverse kinematics and we're
going to give a different initial condition.
I'm going to start the search with Q1 equal
to minus one radiance instead of zero radiance
and run the solver and once again we come
back to exactly the same solution that I had
before.
Let's try an different initial condition,
let's try setting this one to minus one and
hey, now we have a different solution and
let's plot what that solution looks like,
we can see that once again it has achieved
the desired end effector position, one in the
X direction one in the Y direction, but the
configuration of the robot is now different.
You see that determining the initial joint
angles that would achieve that second configuration
was not straight forward, it required a little
bit of trial and error in order to guide the
algorithm, to finding this alternative solution.
Now let's look at performing numerical inverse
kinematics for this six degree of freedom
robot, which moves in three dimensions.
The first thing we're going to do is to load
a model of the Puma robot, we now have a variable
in our workspace and I'm going to plot the
robot in its zero angle configuration, using
the workspace variable QZ which was defined
by the MDL Puma 560 script. And here we see
the robot in it's zero angle pose. Next thing
I'm going to do is define the pose that I
want the end effector to adopt. And it's going
to have a translational component of 0.6 in
the X direction, 0.2 in the Y direction, zero
in the Z direction and I'm going to change
the orientation of the end effector. It's got
a roll angle of zero, pitch angle of 180 degrees
and a yaw angle of 180 degrees, specify degrees
and this is the homogeneous transformation
representing the pose I'd like the robot to
adopt.
I'm going to enable plot hold and now I'm
going to plot that particular pose, so we
can see whether the robot is right now and
the pose that I would like it to adopt.
Now I'm going to compute the inverse kinematics
and this time I'm going to do it numerically.
And I use a slightly different method on the
P560 object, I use the method ikine, I pass
in the pose I'd like the robot to adopt and
I pass in the initial set of joint angles
for the numerical algorithm and I'm just going
to make them all zero. It's not particularly
imaginative, but we'll see what happens. Okay
the algorithm has completed and it's computed
a set of joint angles. If I now plot the robot
in that configuration, we can see that the
position of the robot end effector is at the
origin of the blue co-ordinate frame that
I drew and that the X, Y and Z axis of the
robot's end effector are parallel to the X,
Y and Z axes of the co-ordinate frame that
I desire.
The robot's configuration looks a little bit
awkward, that's because with the numerical
technique, I cannot explicitly control the
pose that it adopts. I need to try some different
initial conditions in order to perhaps get
a configuration where the robot's elbow is
up. You'll notice an error message here in
red, that's nothing to be worried about, it's
because the initial set of joint angles that
I chose, all zeros, results in a robot configuration
that is singular and singular configurations
is something that we're going to discuss along
with Jacobians in the next two lectures.
Solving the inverse kinematics numerically
looks like a pretty easy thing to do, are
there any drawbacks? Well there are a few.
First of all it's important to choose a good
initial set of joint co-ordinates. If the
joint co-ordinates are too far away from the
actual joint co-ordinates required to achieve
the pose then the numerical solution may not
in fact converge. Another problem is that
we can't guarantee a particular robot configuration.
The robot configuration that is found, depends
on the initial joint co-ordinates that are
chosen, so the numerical algorithm will start
with a particular set of joint angles that
you give it and it will perform the optimization
until it matches the desired end effector pose.
The particular configuration that it ends
up with, depends on your initial choice of
joint co-ordinates. Now importantly, you cannot
control the robot configuration as you can
with the analytic solution.
And finally the numerical solution can be
computationally expensive. It's an iterative
algorithm and the number of iterations depends
in some way on how good your initial joint
co-ordinates are. So if you wanted this to
run in real time, to be able to compute inverse
kinematics say in a thousandth of a second,
then a numerical algorithm may not be the
most appropriate way to go.